BANGALORE  : The first successful stem cell therapy for traumatic brain injury
in the country was conducted by doctors at BGS Global Hospitals.

Through this therapy, bone marrow was transplanted directly into the brain. N K
Venkataramana, chief neurosurgeon of BGS Hospitals, confirmed that this is the
first such attempt in India and second in the world. "China made the first
attempt."

The therapy was done on Madhumalika, 27, who was admitted to BGS Global
Hospitals following a road accident on December 14 last year. She suffered from
`diffuse axonal brain injury' -- a severe form of brain injury where the
patient remains unconscious for a variable period. The patient needs to be
assisted in his or her daily activities. In her case, she remained in a coma
for more than three months.

Her mother had to resign from work and her father opted for the voluntary
retirement scheme to look after their only daughter. "We had no hope of getting
her back after the fatal injury. Also, we were unsure of the effects of the
therapy on her. But we had to take a chance," her father said.

In the surgery done in March, four million stem cells per body weight, which
were prepared at Stempeutics Research Pvt Ltd, were injected directly into her
brain.

After a month of the transplant, she showed considerable improvement. She
became conscious, started talking and could move her limbs. She was also able
to recognize family members and friends. But the prolonged stay in bed resulted
in stiffness of the joints, for which she is undergoing physiotherapy.

Venkataramana said the belief that brain injuries aren't curable has been
proved wrong. "The need to help accident victims led us to work on stem cell
therapy," he added.

"Since 2004, there has been a pressing need to help the rising number of people
who were disabled following road accidents. Stem cell therapy was one of the
means to face the situation," he explained.

"We're planning to carry out a pilot study in treating head injuries with stem
cells." 
